# 12. Develop Ideas

Tags:[ #zettlkasten, #productivity ]
@ID:20200317131132

## Literature Notes
1. (pg. 108): Counter-intuitively a topic-related wiki would serve to isolate the notes (limiting connections and natural expansion). By eliminating topics and only keeping a loose order an important property is highlighted; notes are only as valuable as their connections, and we must work to build and understand those connections.
2. (pg: 108): "Because the slip-box is not intended to be an encyclopedia, but a tool to think with, we don't need to worry about completeness." Gaps in knowledge become obvious when it comes time to write, and these gaps are easy enough to fill!
3. (pg: 108): The slipbox is the medium we think.
4. (pg: 110): Should be able to update links to reflect changes in structure. One of the advantages of the 'shipping container' approach is that rather than meta-hierarchical structures, collections of topics are expressed in the same atomic structure as other facts; as a note!
5. (pg. 112,113): There are two types of links: 1) Links on an entrypoint (these are the notes that the index links to), 2) Plain old note to note links
6. (pg. 120): Pay attention to what you want to remember, encode it correctly, revisit these important facts.
7. (pg. 128,129): Makes the argument that the slipbox helps to avoid survivorship bias by training us to look for whats missing? I don't buy it.
8. (pg. 130,131): There seems to be a big inconsistency between saying structure and constraints mobilize creativity, when the primary argument against topic headers was that they are unduly restricting.